Category: Trip Reports
Date: 2022-08-26
Title: UTMB

The Ultra Trail du Mont Blanc (UTMB) is a 172 kilometer (106 mile) trail
race with 10000m (33000 feet) of climbing, mostly following the gorgeous
[Tour du Mont Blanc](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tour_du_Mont_Blanc)
trekking route. It starts in Chamonix-Mont-Blanc, France and circles
Mont Blanc, passing through Italy and Switzerland before returning. I'd
wanted to run it for years, eventually qualifying by finishing the 2021
[VDA](%7Bfilename%7D2021_07_09_VDA.rst).

Part of the experience of ultrarunning is moving though the inevitable
mental and physical highs and lows. This race, though, presented a new
wrinkle: the low point was the start. This was not at all what I had
expected or planned for. Usually by the time you're in the crowd
waiting to run, you're excited and your legs are coiled springs after a
couple of weeks of tapering. The problem is usually to try to contain
your excitement and not go out too fast.

The weather was perfect - 10-20 C everywhere with very scattered rain.
My training peak race (the SwissAlps 50k) two weeks before had gone
well. I was rested, and I was at the start of a race I'd wanted to run
for a long time, minutes before the Friday 6pm starting gun. I should
have been at a near-record high.

But no. About three days previously, on Tuesday night, I had come home
after a long day at work and quickly grabbed dinner of leftovers from
the fridge. I remarked how low energy I seemed on Wednesday, but figured
maybe my body was cunningly conserving energy for the race. After lunch
on Wednesday, I started feeling ill, and went home early after vomiting.
I vomited again and spent until Thursday morning in bed. Eventually I
pieced together that I'd eaten some ancient hummus on Tuesday and had
food poisoning. I was glad that this, and not a stomach virus, was the
explanation, as food poisoning is over quickly and my (exceptionally
good-looking) partner wasn't at risk - she had already done so much to
support me in training for and running this race that it would have been
pretty uncool to infect her and then leave her for days to take care of
our 22-month old.

I didn't feel great, but was eating and drinking somewhat normally
around midday on Thursday when I took the train to Chamonix.

My mom was visiting Europe, and she and my aunt from nearby in France
would come to support me, which was really nice. They'd booked a
fantastic hotel which was very conveniently located - in fact a bit too
convenient as you could actually see, and therefore hear, the start line
from the balcony! Looking down, I spied Jim Walmsley being interviewed
in an adjacent courtyard.

I still just felt flat, though. No energy, no enthusiasm, no special
appetite. I felt thirsty, with a dry mouth, no matter how much I drank.

Not to be too graphic, but my stomach was rumbling and the last
"visit" before the race was [a
six](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bristol_stool_scale). This maybe
explained the feelings of dehydration.

So there I was, at the start of the UTMB as I'd seen portrayed so many
times, in the crowd at the Place du Triangle de l'AmitiÃ©, flags and
music and people leaning out of balconies, sitting on the ground while
they announced the elite runners. I was probably 20% of the way back,
which was where I had wanted to run at the start. I was not thinking
very clearly and didn't have the energy to deviate from the plan,
though barring some miracle where running made me less tired, that plan
seemed unachievable.

> [![calves](images/2022_08_26_UTMB/small/calves.jpg){width="350px"}](images/2022_08_26_UTMB/calves.jpg)
>
> Waiting on the ground at the start. While down there I learned that
> the guy on the left is a massage therapist from Arizona with a rod in
> his femur. (Click photos for larger versions.)

<br/>

> [![start](images/2022_08_26_UTMB/small/start.jpg){width="350px"}](images/2022_08_26_UTMB/start.jpg)
>
> My view before the start.

It was so loud that I was glad that all the other, standing people
dampened the noise with their bodies. About 10 minutes before the start,
I stood up. I couldn't believe how un-psyched I was. We did the thing
you always see in the videos with everyone clapping over their heads.
Ugh. With two minutes left, [Conquest of
Paradise](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WYeDsa4Tw0c) stirred me the
tiniest bit (I mean come on) but mainly my head was full of negativity,
with despairing narratives. "This was your one chance to run this race,
you have perfect conditions, and you screwed it up by eating things
without even looking at them." "You told everyone you know about this
and you're never going to finish." "You've lost touch with your
mountaineering roots, spraying before you send like a douchebag".
"You're going to have to suffer a lot here to save face, before you
inevitably have to stop".

In the [previous 100-miler](%7Bfilename%7D2021_07_09_VDA.rst), the low
point had come well after 24 hours and 100 kilometers. This really got
me down - if the baseline, when I was in the best physical shape, was
this crap, what chance did I have once things got worse, which they
surely would?

Anyway, we were off! I just went with the flow. Huge crowds as we took
the roads and then wide trails to Les Houches. Some guy with a piece of
cardboard reading "Chamonix hates UTMB". Lots of adorable kids getting
low fives. People partying by the side of the trail, cheering you on.
Reading your bib and screaming "Allez PaTRIQUE!". A guy jumped out to
congratulate me on having the same shoes as him. I would estimate there
were 750 pairs of Speedgoats in the race so this probably provided a lot
of entertainment.

"UTMB", written several times on the road in chalk, each instance
surrounded by a penis.

> [![first_sunset](images/2022_08_26_UTMB/small/first_sunset.jpg){width="350px"}](images/2022_08_26_UTMB/first_sunset.jpg)
>
> Around sunset, starting the descent to St. Gervais.

I can't say I had any particularly severe symptoms, in retrospect, but
just felt bad - my stomach not really settled, eating and drinking not
having the desired effect, no energy. I moped my way up and down the
first major climb, out of Les Houches and down to St. Gervais.

The section of the course after St. Gervais is a long, gentle uphill.
(As an aside, I feel honor bound to not do what everyone does, which is
say things like that and imply that it's all uphill or all gentle, or
that "downhill" sections are all downhill. There are usually frequent
"small" ups and downs in mountain races, and "all downhill" is a
lie, 99% of the time.)

At some point I stopped trying to keep up with the crowd and moved into
alternating walking and jogging, even on almost flat parts. A young teen
cheered people in French, but when I passed, walking an easy part, she
turned sour and called me "zzlow". It was a bit humid after the
afternoon's rain, I was sweating a lot, and started thinking about
where I was going to bail. I figured that even though it would be no
fun, I would have to go quite a way before I could quit without deeply
regretting it later, and by that point I would probably want to walk it
in to Courmayeur at 80k, which is the premier bailing-on-UTMB spot, with
a bus back to Chamonix through the tunnel.

Speaking of not spraying before you send, that phrase was in mind
because I'd spent much of the previous week reading posts from Eric
Gilbertson. In particular, just weeks prior, he had pulled one of the
more impressive examples of that ethos, [climbing
K2](http://www.countryhighpoints.com/k2/) and telling only the absolute
minimum number of people about it beforehand. Those stories really
helped get me through. I thought something like "If he can decide to
climb above 8000m, with no oxygen tank and only a bottle of Gatorade for
calories for 24 hours, because anything else would get thrown up, I can
certainly decide to keep going on one of the best travelled backpacking
trails in Europe, surrounded by hundreds of people and aid stations,
despite being miserable and having a sore tummy."

I felt my head moving back toward the right place once I accepted my
fate. I was disappointed that my goal time (32 hours, optimistic) seemed
totally out of the question, but the phrase that stuck was "play the
hand you're dealt." The game was now to be super smart and finish the
race with slow consistency.

Loud noises and crowds aren't fun when you're feeling ill, and "loud
noises and crowds" is the theme of the first part of UTMB. For hours,
you're running in a dense crowd with spectators yelling, ringing
cowbells , blasting music, etc. It's like the Tour de France but you
can't get away as fast. St. Gervais was like freaking Mardi Gras. The
Les Contamines aid station was like a nightclub - shoulder-to shoulder
people inside and a DJ outside blasting "Gangnam Style". This all
culminated at Notre Dame de La Gorge with a nightmarish Hoka-themed LED
display. Then things really shifted. It got quiet. No moon, stars
overhead. No sounds but steps and breathing and trickling streams. A
light breeze. Magic.

Things settled down a bit. We got into a good rhythm on immaculate
hiking trails, evenly graded and perfect for steady uphill progress. We
became part of an endless river of headlamps in both directions. Up and
up we climbed to the Col du Bonhomme, false summit after false summit.

> [![lamps](images/2022_08_26_UTMB/small/lamps.jpg){width="350px"}](images/2022_08_26_UTMB/lamps.jpg)
>
> Lamps in the night, on the way up to the Col du Bonhomme.

The descent to Les Chapieux was probably the first "fun" part. This
part of the course had the most amazingly smooth trails.

There is reliable space for very little in my head, and the one thing I
was trying to remember on this race was "eat the hot food". Not doing
that at Bourg St. Maurice had been my biggest mistake at
[TDS](%7Bfilename%7D2021_08_24_TDS.rst) the year prior. Les Chapieux was
the first aid station that promised hot food, and I planned to eat it
here and and at every other aid station that offered it.

After this was a wonderful ascent on a road, no headlamp required. This
was a tough section of the course in terms of distance and elevation
change between aid stations, climbing up to the Col de la Seigne,
followed by another, shorter, descent and climb. It was indeed difficult
to get to the Col de la Seigne into Italy, but the next section over the
Col des Pyramids Calcaires was very enjoyable, as this section becomes a
jumble of talus and passing people in the conga line didn't seem
productive. So, I got to take it slow and recover, chatting to a nearby
American. My head had cleared greatly by this point.

There were lots of Americans in the race, and the American flag on the
bib provides an excuse to chat. I'd later learn that one of these
Americans at about my pace was being crewed by my friend Wouter!

I was feeling great descending to Lac Combal, as the first glimmers of
sunrise appeared. I went through the aid station quickly. I try to know
exactly what I want to get at each aid station, pick it up, and be out,
usually walking and eating, as fast as I possibly can. No sitting, no
taking the pack off. Here I didn't need water as I'd filled up at a
fountain on the way down the last hill (maybe this is risky outside of
Switzerland - I talked to a guy afterwards who said he got sick during
the race from drinking from an Italian fountain), so I just crammed a
few snacks in my mouth and drank some coke. I'm not a fast runner, so
this is an effective way get a lower race time.

The climb up to Arete du Mont Favre was smooth, and I did actually pass
a couple of people, which is rare. From Lac Combal to Courmayeur was one
of only a couple of sections of the course I'd been on before, as it
reverses the start of the TDS.

We had the unbelievable luck to arrive at the Arete du Mont Favre
exactly as the sun rose, a few minutes after 7. I was glad I'd decided
I would take some photos on this route, and my new pack had ample pocket
space to keep the phone handy (ha).

> [![arete_mont_favre](images/2022_08_26_UTMB/small/arete_mont_favre.jpg){width="350px"}](images/2022_08_26_UTMB/arete_mont_favre.jpg)
>
> Sunrise at the Arete du Mont Favre

<br/>

> [![arete_mont_favre_descent](images/2022_08_26_UTMB/small/arete_mont_favre_descent.jpg){width="350px"}](images/2022_08_26_UTMB/arete_mont_favre_descent.jpg)
>
> Descending from the Arete du Mont Favre

The descent was long, as I knew well from having climbed it. I was
having fun trying to be efficient, in particular because I observed a
lot of "dancing" in front of me, where someone would be running
downhill at exactly the same speed that I was walking. Especially when
legs are tired, it often seems to be a good idea to just smoothly walk
down sections with roots or rocks.

I was impressed by the efficient drop bag distribution on the way into
the gym at Courmayeur. There are racks, arranged by bib number, as you
go in, so no time wasted in picking it up. My headlamp really eats
batteries and was dimming a lot, so I wanted to swap in the extra extra
set I had in the drop bag, as well as the restock on gels. I was through
quickly and was then very happy to meet Wouter outside!

It was now morning, and I started walking towards one of my more feared
sections of the course, the climb out of Courmayeur to Refuge Bertone.
This is about 5 km with 800m of climbing and promised to be hot, as
it's relatively low elevation and it was now day. It was indeed quite
challenging, especially the parts which were exposed to the sun, and I
was suffering at the top with the heat. The next section has lots of
very runnable parts during a rolling traverse, but I was not feeling
strong enough to run very much of it.

> [![traverse](images/2022_08_26_UTMB/small/traverse.jpg){width="350px"}](images/2022_08_26_UTMB/traverse.jpg)
>
> The traversing, rolling section between Refuge Bertone and Arnouvaz.

I trickled very slowly into Arnouvaz, feeling hot and defeated. Here, I
knew I needed a big reset to get more calories and to cool down before
the big climb that followed up to the psychologically important Grand
Col Ferret. I stayed for 30 minutes, trying to eat and drink a lot, and
dozing off for a couple of minutes with my head on the table. I didn't
feel great as I left, but certainly better, and I was happy to see that
some clouds had appeared and it wasn't so sunny as when I'd entered.
Once again, Wouter appeared, this time with a telephoto lens!

> [![arnouvaz_wouter](images/2022_08_26_UTMB/small/arnouvaz_wouter.jpg){width="350px"}](images/2022_08_26_UTMB/arnouvaz_wouter.jpg)
>
> Noticing Wouter with his camera.

<br/>

> [![hat_wouter](images/2022_08_26_UTMB/small/hat_wouter.jpg){width="350px"}](images/2022_08_26_UTMB/hat_wouter.jpg)
>
> My poor hat skills. Photo from Wouter.

<br/>

> [![grand_col_ferret_start_wouter](images/2022_08_26_UTMB/small/grand_col_ferret_start_wouter.jpg){width="350px"}](images/2022_08_26_UTMB/grand_col_ferret_start_wouter.jpg)
>
> Starting up the Grand Col Ferret. Photo from Wouter.

The climb up to the Grand Col Ferret was as brutal as promised. One of
the many great things about the UTMB course is the sheer variation in
ways to climb up huge hills. The Col du Bonhomme was perfect, smooth
switchbacks. This was steep trails up a grassy slope. Later, we'd get
jumbles of rocks and roots, and later (the best) steep rough granite
steps.

> [![grand_col_ferret_middle](images/2022_08_26_UTMB/small/grand_col_ferret_middle.jpg){width="350px"}](images/2022_08_26_UTMB/grand_col_ferret_middle.jpg)
>
> On the way up the Grand Col Ferret.

<br/>

> [![grand_col_ferret_middle_2](images/2022_08_26_UTMB/small/grand_col_ferret_middle_2.jpg){width="350px"}](images/2022_08_26_UTMB/grand_col_ferret_middle_2.jpg)
>
> On the way up the Grand Col Ferret.

<br/>

> [![grand_col_ferret_top](images/2022_08_26_UTMB/small/grand_col_ferret_top.jpg){width="350px"}](images/2022_08_26_UTMB/grand_col_ferret_top.jpg)
>
> View from the Grand Col Ferret.

<br/>

> [![grand_col_ferret_top_2](images/2022_08_26_UTMB/small/grand_col_ferret_top_2.jpg){width="350px"}](images/2022_08_26_UTMB/grand_col_ferret_top_2.jpg)
>
> At the Grand Col Ferret

I felt some blisters on my toes starting down the other side into
Switzerland, and wasted time trying to apply some duct tape. I don't
think this helped that much, and I ended up with blisters on several
toes anyway. Blisters aren't usually an issue for me but I probably
pushed it too far wearing gritty old cheapo Decathlon compression socks.

The next section felt long, even though it's an easier part of the
course. It was the hottest part of the day, which I never do very well
in, and I wasn't eating enough, I don't think. I don't remember a lot
from this part, other than I was very surprised at the number of
American/Canadian sounding supporters sitting along the trail on the
valley floor. I think it might even have been the majority of people who
cheered as we passed were from North America - maybe this little Swiss
valley is a popular place to rent a house for vacations.

> [![champex_approach](images/2022_08_26_UTMB/small/champex_approach.jpg){width="350px"}](images/2022_08_26_UTMB/champex_approach.jpg)
>
> Champex-Lac is in the notch you can see.

Down down down (and non-trivial ups, don't forget) to Issert, and then
the climb (4 left!) to Champex-Lac. I could tell by various grumbling
around me that I was not the only one who found this climb interminable.
You think you can see where the lake is, but you're wrong. It's above
that.

The section after Champex-Lac was another one I'd (correctly) predicted
would be very hard, so I'd planned a longer stop here, as it was one of
the big aid stations guaranteed to have hot food. The rice and soup here
didn't go down as well as it had in Le Chapieux, and I didn't want to
get too cold, so I left after about 15 minutes, with my mid layer and
beanie on. It was now evening.

A downhill fire road section featured the only rain during the race - I
got the jacket out in case it got worse, but it was almost light enough
to not have bothered. The rain did make the next section worse, though,
as things were muddy and humid. If it hadn't have been for the start,
this would have been the low point. My stomach wasn't feeling good as
we started the uphill, which featured a lot of steep, muddy rocks
through the forest, humid after the rain. I realized that I had not
managed my food reserves well, and was now down to only the most
caffeinated gels (40mg per). I ate one anyway but suffered with the
increasingly upset stomach. (Unloading my pack after the race, I found
more normal gels tucked away - whoops).

The climb seemed endless. For a lot of it, I was in the company of three
guys having an animated conversation in a language I couldn't identify.
It sounded somehow slavic, but I definitely heard a lot of romance
words - people afterwards told me that likely means Romanian. At one
point I came around the corner to find one of the three with his pants
down, casually applying anti-chafe cream for all to see, not breaking
the conversation.

The steep rocky section before Bovine was the hardest part, before
things flattened out a bit. I was very thankful to reach the gate at the
top of the climb, beginning the descent (again, not all downhill)
through La GiÃ¨te. I felt very slow going down, not able to make much
speed on the fairly technical trail with my weakening quads and my
dimming headlamp. The last very steep section down to Trient (about
142km and 8200m of climbing in) was tough, and by the time I arrived at
the aid station I was feeling very low and didn't see how I was going
to do two more up-and-downs like *that* to finish the race.

I used the bathroom and was just convincing myself that all I needed to
do was go, eat, and reset. Then there was Wouter again! He was very
encouraging, said I was doing great, and that the next section would
only take two hours. I hit the aid station and ate well - I made sure to
get some cheese and other "real" stuff to try and settle my stomach,
and the best was ramen-style noodles and broth, which went down
amazingly.

> [![trient_wouter](images/2022_08_26_UTMB/small/trient_wouter.jpg){width="350px"}](images/2022_08_26_UTMB/trient_wouter.jpg)
>
> Tired in Trient, eating the life-saving noodles. Wouter sniped this
> one from outside the aid station with his long lens.

I was feeling hugely better by the time I got up and chatted to Wouter
and his friend again and headed out. Luckily, the next up-and-down was
much more straight forward - an easier trail - still very steep but dry.
My right heel, which often gets tight, and calf were feeling strained,
though, due to the steep angle (without many steps). I had my head in
the right place, doing a great job of not anticipating the top - some
quick math told me that it would require at least an hour and a half, so
there was no point in even thinking about finishing the climb - I just
had to focus on maintaining an efficient motion. This worked so well
that I was surprised how little climbing remained, according to the sign
at the intermediate station at Les Tscheppes. The next section was very
nice trail (would have been quite runnable if I hadn't been so tired),
traversing around, and then down down down to Vallorcine. A portion
descending a ski resort snow cat road was brutal, an even slope just
steep enough to burn the quads.

The approach to the Vallorcine aid station was so convoluted as to seem
like a joke. I really think that I travelled much more than 360 degrees
around it before arriving there. Once again, Wouter was outside! He
seemed really psyched that I had only taken about two and a half hours
to get there. I didn't stay long, as I felt pretty good and was eager
to finish the thing.

I walked the gentle uphill section to the Col des Montets as fast as I
could. I lost some time to a bathroom break that I should have just
taken care of at the aid station (stomach doing better, but not that
much better..).

I got the first wave of real sleepiness at a bad moment, approaching the
only real road crossing of the route, at the Col des Montets. They have
lots of lights and staff there, but cars scare me a lot more than
mountains, so at this point I decided to get back on the caffeine train
by hitting the electrolyte drink tabs. By this point I think I'd eaten
enough real food that it was fine.

The last climb was a dream. It was still hard, of course, but I was
armed with my "be patient" which had worked so well on the previous
climb, combined with the knowledge that I didn't have to be *that*
patient - this was the last big uphill. Plus, this terrain was in my
wheelhouse - lots of beautiful granite steps. Again I amused myself
trying to be methodical and efficient, imagining myself plodding
inexorably up some endless snow slope in crampons. I realized that I had
likely been here before, on a backpacking trip with my sister and
brother-and-law! Certain scrambling moves seemed very familiar (but my
brain wasn't exactly trustworthy at this point).

"You have done it. Did you know you are a hero?" said the guy at the
la Tete aux Vents checkpoint. Very admirably, he admitted that although
this is the top of the last big climb, yes there is still more climbing
before you get to La Flegere. It was still slow going to get there, on
very rocky trails, but the technical terrain was engaging, and I felt
surges of strength at some points, passing a few people. Still lots of
deja vu. I drank a last coke at the aid station - I think I drank 1-2
small cups of coke at every single one. Interestingly, in French the
magic word is "Coca" but in (Swiss) German it's "Cola".

The first part of the descent was another run down a cat track slope at
the quad-burning angle. Checking my speed on my watch, I gave up on the
idea of sub-36. Things got easier and easier as we descended (though I
was beginning to worry about my headlamp dying). I heard a guy in front
of me wipe out, but he was uninjured. I was thrilled to hit the gentle
traversing trail angling back towards Chamonix, taking it through La
Floria. I was tempted to go faster but with my dim light and exhausted
state I was also quite wary of the slope to my left. The trail turned
into a fire road, at times was gentle enough to not burn. I felt like I
was running 4 minute miles, but I think it was more like 12. Soon, back
onto the paved road, then across some lawns and the temporary
scaffolding bridge to join the 1.5 km victory run through Chamonix. I'd
walked up and down this section many times already, as it connected the
hotel and the gyms with the drop bags and bibs. It was 6 am, so quite
peaceful, though a handful of people were still there to cheer.

I felt elated and a little choked up jogging through the streets, as
I'd seen so many people do while walking around town. Unbelievable!
I'd heard about the race a very long time ago, from my aunt who lives
nearby and has a friend who ran the race many times near the beginning -
I still have a 2006 UTMB shirt that she gave me. At the time I didn't
even understand what it was - they hike the whole backpacking route in 2
days because they barely sleep? Lunatics! And now I had done the route
myself in 1.5 days.

Soon I was running up the chute, and I was done! My mom and that very
same aunt were there to meet me and again, Wouter!

I [finished in 36:10, 498th
place](https://utmbmontblanc.com/en/page/349/results.html), which was
about my "I'd be pretty darn happy with that" time. Given that I
started the race quite firmly believing I wouldn't even finish, I'm
thrilled with it, and am proud that I ran smart after resetting - from
looking at the race tracking, I dropped to 1114th at Les Contamines, the
Gangnam Style nightmare zone, and then slowly moved up. This must have
happened almost entirely by taking shorter stops at aid stations
(especially Courmayeur), and the fact that some runners ahead of me
didn't finish.

In starting the training I'd thought that if everything went perfectly,
I could do 32 hours. I still think that was realistic, but things did
not go perfectly - I didn't get the originally-hoped training volume
(new job, illness, moving, etc.), and of course the bad start to the
race.

I'm so thankful for all the friends and family who supported and
encouraged me in training for and running the race, especially my
partner, who went above and beyond in indulging some idiot who wanted to
go in a big circle for the fun of it. Special thanks to my mom and aunt
for coming out to Chamonix to support, and to Wouter for the surprise
encouragement out on the course!

# Data

-   [Race results](https://utmbmontblanc.com/en/page/349/results.html)
-   [Run on Strava](https://www.strava.com/activities/7718036550).

# Lessons learned

-   Don't skimp on batteries. Given that this was a two-night race with
    no moon, much of it would have been a more fun and faster if I'd
    been able to keep the lamp on full brightness (especially because I
    gave up trying to wear my glasses, due to fogginess, pretty
    quickly). I also may need to look into a different headlamp or a
    rechargeable battery pack, because my current one doesn't seem to
    last as long as advertised on AAs.
-   Separate sugar and caffeine. Next time I might consider taking
    non-caffeinated gels and caffeine tablets (or just using the
    caffeinated electrolyte tabs I have).
-   Don't use old socks. Blisters haven't been a big issue for me, but
    this time I got several on my toes (mostly *on top*, which is
    unusual), I think from using old grainy socks and perhaps not lacing
    my shoes tight enough for the downhills.
-   Don't eat week-old hummus.

Once again, the mantras basically worked. Efficiency, Eat, Reset.
